A Conjurer's Confessions

I

SELF-TRAINING


[Sleight-of-hand theories alone cannot explain the mysteries of
"magic" as practiced by that eminent Frenchman who revolutionized
the entire art, and who was finally called upon to help his
government out of a difficuity--Robert-Houdin.  The success of his
most famous performances hung not only on an incredible dexterity,
but also on high ingenuity and moral courage, as the following
pages from his "Memoirs" will prove to the reader.  The story
begins when the young man of twenty was laboring patiently as
apprentice to a watchmaker.]


In order to aid my progress and afford me relaxation, my master
recommended me to study some treatises on mechanics in general, and
on clockmaking in particular.  As this suited my taste exactly, I
gladly assented, and I was devoting myself passionately to this
attractive study, when a circumstance, apparently most simple,
suddenly decided my future life by revealing to me a vocation whose
mysterious resources must open a vast field for my inventive and
fanciful ideas.

One evening I went into a bookseller's shop to buy Berthoud's
"Treatise on Clockmaking," which I knew he had.  The tradesman
being engaged at the moment on matters more important, took down
two volumes from the shelves and handed them to me without
ceremony.  On returning home I sat down to peruse my treatise
conscientiously, but judge of my surprise when I read on the back
of one of the volumes "SCIENTIFIC AMUSEMENTS."  Astonished at
finding such a title on a professional work, I opened it
impatiently, and, on running through the table of contents, my
surprise was doubled on reading these strange phrases:

The way of performing tricks with the cards--How to guess a
person's thoughts--To cut off a pigeon's head, to restore it to
life, etc., etc.

The bookseller had made a mistake.  In his haste, he had given me
two volumes of the Encyclopaedia instead of Berthoud.  Fascinated,
however, by the announcement of such marvels, I devoured the
mysterious pages, and the further my reading advanced, the more I
saw laid bare before me the secrets of an art for which I was
unconsciously predestined.

I fear I shall be accused of exaggeration, or at least not be
understood by many of my readers, when I say that this discovery
caused me the greatest joy I had ever experienced.  At this moment
a secret presentiment warned me that success, perhaps glory, would
one day accrue to me in the apparent realization of the marvelous
and impossible, and fortunately these presentiments did not err.

The resemblance between two books, and the hurry of a bookseller,
were the commonplace causes of the most important event in my life.

It may be urged that different circumstances might have suggested
this profession to me at a later date.  It is probable; but then I
should have had no time for it.  Would any workman, artisan, or
tradesman give up a certainty, however slight it may be, to yield
to a passion which would be surely regarded as a mania?  Hence my
irresistible penchant for the mysterious could only be followed at
this precise period of my life.

How often since have I blessed this providential error, without
which I should have probably vegetated as a country watchmaker!  My
life would have been spent in gentle monotony; I should have been
spared many sufferings, emotions, and shocks: but, on the other
hand, what lively sensations, what profound delight would have been
sacrificed!

I was eagerly devouring every line of the magic book which
described the astounding tricks; my head was aglow, and I at times
gave way to thoughts which plunged me in ecstasy.

The author gave a very plain explanation of his tricks; still, he
committed the error of supposing his readers possessed of the
necessary skill to perform them.  Now, I was entirely deficient in
this skill, and though most desirous of acquiring it, I found
nothing in the book to indicate the means.  I was in the position
of a man who attempts to copy a picture without possessing the
slightest notion of drawing and painting.

In the absence of a professor to instruct me, I was compelled to
create the principles of the science I wished to study.  In the
first place, I recognized the fundamental principle of sleight-of-
hand, that the organs performing the principal part are the sight
and touch.  I saw that, in order to attain any degree of
perfection, the professor must develop these organs to their
fullest extent--for, in his exhibitions, he must be able to see
everything that takes place around him at half a glance, and
execute his deceptions with unfailing dexterity.

I had been often struck by the ease with which pianists can read
and perform at sight the most difficult pieces.  I saw that, by
practice, it would be possible to create a certainty of perception
and facility of touch, rendering it easy for the artist to attend
to several things simultaneously, while his hands were busy
employed with some complicated task.  This faculty I wished to
acquire and apply to sleight-of-hand; still, as music could not
afford me the necessary elements, I had recourse to the juggler's
art, in which I hoped to meet with an analogous result.

It is well known that the trick with the balls wonderfully improves
the touch, but does it not improve the vision at the same time?  In
fact, when a juggler throws into the air four balls crossing each
other in various directions, he requires an extraordinary power of
sight to follow the direction his hands have given to each of the
balls.  At this period a corn-cutter resided at Blois, who
possessed the double talent of juggling and extracting corns with a
skill worthy of the lightness of his hands.  Still, with both these
qualities, he was not rich, and being aware of that fact, I hoped
to obtain lessons from him at a price suited to my modest finances.
In fact, for ten francs he agreed to initiate me in the juggling
art.

I practiced with so much zeal, and progressed so rapidly, that in
less than a month I had nothing more to learn; at least, I knew as
much as my master, with the exception of corn-cutting, the monopoly
in which I left him.  I was able to juggle with four balls at once.
But this did not satisfy my ambition; so I placed a book before me,
and, while the balls were in the air, I accustomed myself to read
without any hesitation.

This will probably seem to my readers very extraordinary; but I
shall surprise them still more, when I say that I have just amused
myself by repeating this curious experiment.  Though thirty years
have elapsed since the time of which I am writing, and though I
scarcely once touched the balls during that period, I can still
manage to read with ease while keeping three balls up.

The practice of this trick gave my fingers a remarkable degree of
delicacy and certainty, while my eye was at the same time acquiring
a promptitude of perception that was quite marvelous.  Presently I
shall have to speak of the service this rendered me in my
experiment of second sight.  After having thus made my hands supple
and docile, I went on straight to sleight-of-hand, and I more
especially devoted myself to the manipulation of cards and
palmistry.

This operation requires a great deal of practice; for, while the
hand is held apparently open, balls, corks, lumps of sugar, coins,
etc., must be held unseen, the fingers remaining perfectly free and
limber.

Owing to the little time at my disposal, the difficulties connected
with these new experiments would have been insurmountable had I not
found a mode of practicing without neglecting my business.  It was
the fashion in those days to wear coats with large pockets on the
hips, called a la proprietaire, so whenever my hands were not
otherwise engaged they slipped naturally into my pockets, and set
to work with cards, coins, or one of the objects I have mentioned.
It will be easily understood how much time I gained by this.  Thus,
for instance, when out on errands my hands could be at work on both
sides; at dinner, I often ate my soup with one hand while I was
learning to sauter la coupe with the other--in short, the slightest
moment of relaxation was devoted to my favorite pursuit.


II

"SECOND SIGHT"


[A thousand more trials of patience and perseverance finally
brought to the conjurer a Parisian theater and an appreciative
clientele.  But he never ceased to labor and improve the quality of
his marvelous effects.]


The experiment, however, to which I owed my reputation was one
inspired by that fantastic god to whom Pascal attributes all the
discoveries of this sublunary world: it was chance that led me
straight to the invention of SECOND SIGHT.

My two children were playing one day in the drawing-room at a game
they had invented for their own amusement.  The younger had
bandaged his elder brother's eyes, and made him guess the objects
he touched, and when the latter happened to guess right, they
changed places.  This simple game suggested to me the most
complicated idea that ever crossed my mind.

Pursued by the notion, I ran and shut myself up in my workroom, and
was fortunately in that happy state when the mind follows easily
the combinations traced by fancy.  I rested my hand in my hands,
and, in my excitement, laid down the first principles of second
sight.

My readers will remember the experiment suggested to me formerly by
the pianist's dexterity, and the strange faculty I succeeded in
attaining: I could read while juggling with four balls.  Thinking
seriously of this, I fancied that this "perception by appreciation"
might be susceptible of equal development, if I applied its
principles to the memory and the mind.

I resolved, therefore, on making some experiments with my son
Emile, and, in order to make my young assistant understand the
nature of the exercise we were going to learn, I took a domino, the
cinq-quatre for instance, and laid it before him.  Instead of
letting him count the points of the two numbers, I requested the
boy to tell me the total at once.

"Nine," he said.

Then I added another domino, the quarter-tray.

"That makes sixteen," he said, without any hesitation.  I stopped
the first lesson here; the next day we succeeded in counting at a
single glance four dominoes, the day after six, and thus we at
length were enabled to give instantaneously the product of a dozen
dominoes.

This result obtained, we applied ourselves to a far more difficult
task, over which we spent a month.  My son and I passed rapidly
before a toy-shop, or any other displaying a variety of wares, and
cast an attentive glance upon it.  A few steps farther on we drew
paper and pencil from our pockets, and tried which could describe
the greater number of objects seen in passing.  I must own that my
son reached a perfection far greater than mine, for he could often
write down forty objects, while I could scarce reach thirty.  Often
feeling vexed at this defeat, I would return to the shop and verify
his statement, but he rarely made a mistake.

My male readers will certainly understand the possibility of this,
but they will recognize the difficulty.  As for my lady readers, I
am convinced beforehand they will not be of the same opinion, for
they daily perform far more astounding feats.  Thus, for instance,
I can safely assert that a lady seeing another pass at full speed
in a carriage, will have had time to analyze her toilet from her
bonnet to her shoes, and be able to describe not only the fashion
and quality of the stuffs, but also say if the lace be real or only
machine-made.  I have known ladies do this.

This natural, or acquired, faculty among ladies, but which my son
and I had only gained by constant practice, was of great service in
my performances, for while I was executing my tricks, I could see
everything that passed around me, and thus prepare to foil any
difficulties presented me.  This exercise had given me, so to
speak, the power of following two ideas simultaneously, and nothing
is more favorable in conjuring than to be able to think at the same
time both of what you are saying and of what you are doing.  I
eventually acquired such a knack in this that I frequently invented
new tricks while going through my performances.  One day, even, I
made a bet I would solve a problem in mechanics while taking my
part in conversation.  We were talking of the pleasure of a country
life, and I calculated during this time the quantity of wheels and
pinions, as well as the necessary cogs, to produce certain
revolutions required, without once failing in my reply.

This slight explanation will be sufficient to show what is the
essential basis of second sight, and I will add that a secret and
unnoticeable correspondence[1] existed between my son and myself,
by which I could announce to him the name, nature, and bulk of
objects handed me by spectators.


[1] "Telegraphy."


As none understood my mode of action, they were tempted to believe
in something extraordinary, and, indeed, my son Emile, then aged
twelve, possessed all the essential qualities to produce this
opinion, for his pale, intellectual, and ever thoughtful face
represented the type of a boy gifted with some supernatural power.

Two months were incessantly employed in erecting the scaffolding of
our tricks, and when we were quite confident of being able to
contend against the difficulties of such an undertaking, we
announced the first representation of second sight.  On the 12th of
February, 1846, I printed in the center of my bill the following
singular announcement:

"In this performance M. Robert-Houdin's son, who is gifted with a
marvelous second sight, after his eyes have been covered with a
thick bandage, will designate every object presented to him by the
audience."

I cannot say whether this announcement attracted any spectators,
for my room was constantly crowded, still I may affirm, what may
seem very extraordinary, that the experiment of second sight, which
afterwards became so fashionable, produced no effect on the first
performance.  I am inclined to believe that the spectators fancied
themselves the dupes of accomplices, but I was much annoyed by the
result, as I had built on the surprise I should produce; still,
having no reason to doubt its ultimate success, I was tempted to
make a second trial, which turned out well.

The next evening I noticed in my room several persons who had been
present on the previous night, and I felt they had come a second
time to assure themselves of the reality of the experiment.  It
seems they were convinced, for my success was complete, and amply
compensated for my former disappointment.

I especially remember a mark of singular approval with which one of
my pit audience favored me.  My son had named to him several
objects he offered in succession; but not feeling satisfied, my
incredulous friend, rising, as if to give more importance to the
difficulty he was about to present, handed me an instrument
peculiar to cloth merchants, and employed to count the number of
threads.  Acquiescing in his wish, I said to my boy, "What do I
hold in my hand?"

"It is an instrument to judge the fineness of cloth, and called a
thread counter."

"By Jove!" my spectator said, energetically, "it is marvelous.  If
I had paid ten francs to see it, I should not begrudge them."

From this moment my room was much too small, and was crowded every
evening.

Still, success is not entirely rose-colored, and I could easily
narrate many disagreeable scenes produced by the reputation I had
of being a sorcerer; but I will only mention one, which forms a
resume of all I pass over:

A young lady of elegant manners paid me a visit one day, and
although her face was hidden by a thick veil, my practiced eyes
perfectly distinguished her features.  She was very pretty.

My incognita would not consent to sit down till she was assured we
were alone, and that I was the real Robert-Houdin.  I also seated
myself, and assuming the attitude of a man prepared to listen, I
bent slightly to my visitor, as if awaiting her pleasure to explain
to me the object of her mysterious visit.  To my great surprise,
the young lady, whose manner betrayed extreme emotion, maintained
the most profound silence, and I began to find the visit very
strange, and was on the point of forcing an explanation, at any
hazard, when the fair unknown timidly ventured these words:

"Good Heavens! sir, I know not how you will interpret my visit."

Here she stopped, and let her eyes sink with a very embarrassed
air; then, making a violent effort, she continued:

"What I have to ask of you, sir, is very difficult to explain."

"Speak, madam, I beg," I said, politely, "and I will try to guess
what you cannot explain to me."

And I began asking myself what this reserve meant.

"In the first place," the young lady said, in a low voice, and
looking round her, "I must tell you confidentially that I loved, my
love was returned, and I--I am betrayed."

At the last word the lady raised her head, overcame the timidity
she felt, and said, in a firm and assured voice:

"Yes, sir--yes, I am betrayed, and for that reason I have come to
you."

"Really, madam," I said, much surprised at this strange confession,
"I do not see how I can help you in such a matter."

"Oh, sir, I entreat you," said my fair visitor, clasping her hands--
"I implore you not to abandon me!"

I had great difficulty in keeping my countenance, and yet I felt an
extreme curiosity to know the history concealed behind this
mystery.

"Calm yourself, madam," I remarked, in a tone of tender sympathy;
"tell me what you would of me, and if it be in my power--"

"If it be in your power!" the young lady said, quickly; "why,
nothing is more easy, sir."

"Explain yourself, madam."

"Well, sir, I wish to be avenged."

"In what way?"

"How, you know better than I, sir; must I teach you?  You have in
your power means to--"

"I, madam?"

"Yes, sir, you! for you are a sorcerer, and cannot deny it."

At this word sorcerer, I was much inclined to laugh; but I was
restrained by the incognita's evident emotion.  Still, wishing to
put an end to a scene which was growing ridiculous, I said, in a
politely ironical tone:

"Unfortunately, madam, you give me a title I never possessed."

"How, sir!" the young woman exclaimed, in a quick tone, "you will
not allow you are--"

"A sorcerer, madam?  Oh, no, I will not."

"You will not?"

"No, a thousand times no, madam."

At these words my visitor rose hastily, muttered a few incoherent
words, appeared suffering from terrible emotion, and then drawing
near me with flaming eyes and passionate gestures, repeated:

"Ah, you will not!  Very good; I now know what I have to do."

Stupefied by such an outbreak, I looked at her fixedly, and began
to suspect the cause of her extraordinary conduct.

"There are two modes of acting," she said, with terrible
volubility, "toward people who devote themselves to magic arts--
entreaty and menaces.  You would not yield to the first of these
means, hence, I must employ the second.  Stay," she added, "perhaps
this will induce you to speak."

And, lifting up her cloak, she laid her hand on the hilt of a
dagger passed through her girdle.  At the same time she suddenly
threw back her veil, and displayed features in which all the signs
of rage and madness could be traced.  No longer having a doubt as
to the person I had to deal with, my first movement was to rise and
stand on my guard; but this first feeling overcome, I repented the
thought of a struggle with the unhappy woman, and determined on
employing a method almost always successful with those deprived of
reason.  I pretended to accede to her wishes.

"If it be so, madam, I yield to your request.  Tell me what you
require."

"I have told you, sir; I wish for vengeance, and there is only one
method to--"

Here there was a fresh interruption, and the young lady, calmed by
my apparent submission, as well as embarrassed by the request she
had to make of me, became again timid and confused.

"Well, madam?"

"Well, sir, I know not how to tell you--how to explain to you--but
I fancy there are certain means--certain spells--which render it
impossible--impossible for a man to be--unfaithful."

"I now understand what you wish, madam.  It is a certain magic
practice employed in the middle ages.  Nothing is easier, and I
will satisfy you."

Decided on playing the farce to the end, I took down the largest
book I could find in my library, turned over the leaves, stopped at
a page which I pretended to scan with profound attention, and then
addressing the lady, who followed all my movements anxiously,

"Madam," I said confidentially, "the spell I am going to perform
renders it necessary for me to know the name of the person; have
the kindness, then, to tell it me."

"Julian!" she said, in a faint voice.

With all the gravity of a real sorcerer, I solemnly thrust a pin
through a lighted candle, and pronounced some cabalistic words.
After which, blowing out the candle, and turning to the poor
creature, I said:

"Madam, it is done; your wish is accomplished."

"Oh, thank you, sir," she replied, with the expression of the
profoundest gratitude; and at the same moment she laid a purse on
the table and rushed away.  I ordered my servant to follow her to
her house, and obtain all the information he could about her, and I
learned she had been a widow for a short time, and that the loss of
an adored husband had disturbed her reason.  The next day I visited
her relatives, and, returning them the purse, I told them the scene
the details of which the reader has just perused.

This scene, with some others that preceded and followed it,
compelled me to take measures to guard myself against bores of
every description.  I could not dream, as formerly, of exiling
myself in the country, but I employed a similar resource: this was
to shut myself up in my workroom, and organize around me a system
of defense against those whom I called, in my ill-temper, thieves
of time.

I daily received visits from persons who were utter strangers to
me; some were worth knowing, but the majority, gaining an
introduction under the most futile pretexts, only came to kill a
portion of their leisure time with me.  It was necessary to
distinguish the tares from the wheat, and this is the arrangement I
made:

When one of these gentlemen rang at my door, an electric
communication struck a bell in my workroom; I was thus warned and
put on my guard.  My servant opened the door, and, as is customary,
inquired the visitor's name, while I, for my part, laid my ear to a
tube, arranged for the purpose, which conveyed to me every word.
If, according to his reply, I thought it as well not to receive
him, I pressed a button, and a white mark that appeared in a
certain part of the hall announced I was not at home to him.  My
servant then stated I was out, and begged the visitor to apply to
the manager.

Sometimes it happened that I erred in my judgment, and regretted
having granted an audience; but I had another mode of shortening a
bore's visit.  I had placed behind the sofa on which I sat an
electric spring, communicating with a bell my servant could hear.
In case of need, and while talking, I threw my arm carelessly over
the back of the sofa, touching the spring, and the bell rang.  Then
my servant, playing a little farce, opened the front door, rang the
bell, which could be heard from the room where I sat, and came to
tell me that M. X--- (a name invented for the occasion) wished to
speak to me.  I ordered M. X--- to be shown into an adjoining room,
and it was very rare that my bore did not raise the siege.  No one
can form an idea how much time I gained by this happy arrangement,
or how many times I blessed my imagination and the celebrated
savant to whom the discovery of galvanism is due!

This feeling can be easily explained, for my time was of
inestimable value.  I husbanded it like a treasure, and never
sacrificed it, unless the sacrifice might help me to discover new
experiments destined to stimulate public curiosity.

To support my determination in making my researches, I had ever
before me this maxim:

IT IS MORE DIFFICULT TO SUPPORT ADMIRATION THAN TO EXCITE IT.

And this other, an apparent corollary of the preceding:

THE FASHION AN ARTIST ENJOYS CAN ONLY LAST AS HIS TALENT DAILY
INCREASES.

Nothing increases a professional man's merit so much as the
possession of an independent fortune; this truth may be coarse, but
it is indubitable.  Not only was I convinced of these principles of
high economy, but I also knew that a man must strive to profit by
the fickle favor of the public, which equally descends if it does
not rise.  Hence I worked my reputation as much as I could.  In
spite of my numerous engagements, I found means to give
performances in all the principal theaters, though great
difficulties frequently arose, as my performance did not end till
half-past ten, and I could only fulfill my other engagements after
that hour.

Eleven o'clock was generally the hour fixed for my appearance on a
strange stage, and my readers may judge of the speed required to
proceed to the theater in so short a time and make my preparations.
It is true that the moments were as well counted as employed, and
my curtain had hardly fallen than, rushing toward the stairs, I got
before my audience, and jumped into a vehicle that bore me off at
full speed.

But this fatigue was as nothing compared to the emotion
occasionally produced by an error in the time that was to elapse
between my two performances.  I remember that, one night, having to
wind up the performances at the Vaudeville, the stage manager
miscalculated the time the pieces would take in performing, and
found himself much in advance.  He sent off an express to warn me
that the curtain had fallen, and I was anxiously expected.  Can my
readers comprehend my wretchedness?  My experiments, of which I
could omit none, would occupy another quarter of an hour; but
instead of indulging in useless recriminations, I resigned myself
and continued my performance, though I was a prey to frightful
anxiety.  While speaking, I fancied I could hear that cadenced yell
of the public to which the famous song, "Des lampions, des
lampions," was set.  Thus, either through preoccupation or a desire
to end sooner, I found when my performance was over I had gained
five minutes out of the quarter of an hour.  Assuredly, it might he
called the quarter of an hour's grace.

To jump into a carriage and drive to the Place de la Bourse was the
affair of an instant; still, twenty minutes had elapsed since the
curtain fell, and that was an enormous time.  My son Emile and I
proceeded up the actors' stairs at full speed, but on the first
step we had heard the cries, whistling, and stamping of the
impatient audience.  What a prospect!  I knew that frequently,
either right or wrong, the public treated an artiste, no matter
whom, very harshly, to remind him of punctuality.  That sovereign
always appears to have on its lips the words of another monarch: "I
was obliged to wait."  However, we hurried up the steps leading to
the stage.

The stage manager, who had been watching, on hearing our hurried
steps, cried from the landing:

"Is that you, M. Houdin?"

"Yes, sir--yes."

"Raise the curtain!" the same voice shouted.

"Wait, wait, it is imp--"

My breath would not allow me to finish my objection; I fell on a
chair, unable to move.

"Come, M. Houdin," the manager said, "DO go on the stage, the
curtain is up, and the public are so impatient."

The door at the back of the stage was open, but I could not pass
through it; fatigue and emotion nailed me to the spot.  Still, an
idea occurred to me, which saved me from the popular wrath.

"Go on to the stage, my boy," I said to my son, "and prepare all
that is wanting for the second-sight trick."

The public allowed themselves to be disarmed by this youth, whose
face inspired a sympathizing interest; and my son, after gravely
bowing to the audience, quietly made his slight preparations, that
is to say, he carried an ottoman to the front of the stage, and
placed on a neighboring table a slate, some chalk, a pack of cards,
and a bandage.

This slight delay enabled me to recover my breath and calm my
nerves, and I advanced in my turn with an attempt to assume the
stereotyped smile, in which I signally failed, as I was so
agitated.  The audience at first remained silent, then their faces
gradually unwrinkled, and soon, one or two claps having been
ventured, they were carried away and peace was made.  I was well
rewarded, however, for this terrible ordeal, as my "second-sight"
never gained a more brilliant triumph.

An incident greatly enlivened the termination of my performance.

A spectator, who had evidently come on purpose to embarrass us, had
tried in vain for some minutes to baffle my son's clairvoyance,
when, turning to me, he said, laying marked stress on his words:

"As your son is a soothsayer, of course he can guess the number of
my stall?"

The importunate spectator doubtless hoped to force us into a
confession of our impotence, for he covered his number, and the
adjacent seats being occupied, it was apparently impossible to read
the numbers.  But I was on my guard against all surprises, and my
reply was ready.  Still, in order to profit as much as possible by
the situation, I feigned to draw back.

"You know, sir," I said, feigning an embarrassed air, "that my son
is neither sorcerer nor diviner; he reads through my eyes, and
hence I have given this experiment the name of second sight.  As I
cannot see the number of your stall, and the seats close to you are
occupied, my son cannot tell it you."

"Ah! I was certain of it," my persecutor said, in triumph, and
turning to his neighbors: "I told you I would pin him."

"Oh, sir! you are not generous in your victory," I said, in my
turn, in a tone of mockery.  "Take care; if you pique my son's
vanity too sharply, he may solve your problem, though it is so
difficult."

"I defy him," said the spectator, leaning firmly against the back
of his seat, to hide the number better--"yes, yes--I defy him!"

"You believe it to be difficult, then?"

"I will grant more: it is impossible."

"Well, then, sir, that is a stronger reason for us to try it.  You
will not be angry if we triumph in our turn?" I added, with a
petulant smile.

"Come, sir; we understand evasions of that sort.  I repeat it--I
challenge you both."

The public found great amusement in this debate, and patiently
awaited its issue.

"Emile," I said to my son, "prove to this gentleman that nothing
can escape your second sight."

"It is number sixty-nine," the boy answered, immediately.

Noisy and hearty applause rose from every part of the theater, in
which our opponent joined, for, confessing his defeat, he
exclaimed, as he clapped his hands, "It is astounding--
magnificent!"

The way I succeeded in finding out the number of the stall was
this: I knew beforehand that in all theaters where the stalls are
divided down the center by a passage, the uneven numbers are on the
right, and the even on the left.  As at the Vaudeville each row was
composed of ten stalls, it followed that on the right hand the
several rows must begin with one, twenty-one, forty-one, and so on,
increasing by twenty each.  Guided by this, I had no difficulty in
discovering that my opponent was seated in number sixty-nine,
representing the fifth stall in the fourth row.  I had prolonged
the conversation for the double purpose of giving more brilliancy
to my experiment, and gaining time to make my researches.  Thus I
applied my process of two simultaneous thoughts, to which I have
already alluded.

As I am now explaining matters, I may as well tell my readers some
of the artifices that added material brilliancy to the second
sight.  I have already said this experiment was the result of a
material communication between myself and my son which no one could
detect.  Its combinations enabled us to describe any conceivable
object; but, though this was a splendid result, I saw that I should
soon encounter unheard-of difficulties in executing it.

The experiment of second sight always formed the termination of my
performance.  Each evening I saw unbelievers arrive with all sorts
of articles to triumph over a secret which they could not unravel.
Before going to see Robert-Houdin's son a council was held, in
which an object that must embarrass the father was chosen.  Among
these were half-effaced antique medals, minerals, books printed in
characters of every description (living and dead languages), coats-
of-arms, microscopic objects, etc.

But what caused me the greatest difficulty was in finding out the
contents of parcels, often tied with a string, or even sealed up.
But I had managed to contend successfully against all these
attempts to embarrass me.  I opened boxes, purses, pocketbooks,
etc., with great ease, and unnoticed, while appearing to be engaged
on something quite different.  Were a sealed parcel offered me, I
cut a small slit in the paper with the nail of my left thumb, which
I always purposely kept very long and sharp, and thus discovered
what it contained.  One essential condition was excellent sight,
and that I possessed to perfection.  I owed it originally to my old
trade, and practice daily improved it.  An equally indispensable
necessity was to know the name of every object offered me.  It was
not enough to say, for instance, "It is a coin"; but my son must
give its technical name, its value, the country in which it was
current, and the year in which it was struck.  Thus, for instance,
if an English crown were handed me, my son was expected to state
that it was struck in the reign of George IV, and had an intrinsic
value of six francs eighteen centimes.

Aided by an excellent memory, we had managed to classify in our
heads the name and value of all foreign money.  We could also
describe a coat-of-arms in heraldic terms.  Thus, on the arms of
the house of X--- being handed me, my son would reply: "Field
gules, with two croziers argent in pale."  This knowledge was very
useful to us in the salons of the Faubourg Saint Germain, where we
were frequently summoned.

I had also learned the characters--though unable to translate a
word--of an infinity of languages, such as Chinese, Russian,
Turkish Greek, Hebrew, etc.  We knew, too, the names of all
surgical instruments, so that a surgical pocketbook, however
complicated it might be, could not embarrass us.  Lastly, I had a
very sufficient knowledge of mineralogy, precious stones,
antiquities, and curiosities; but I had at my command every
possible resource for acquiring these studies, as one of my dearest
and best friends, Aristide le Carpentier, a learned antiquary, and
uncle of the talented composer of the same name, had, and still
has, a cabinet of antique curiosities, which makes the keepers of
the imperial museums fierce with envy.  My son and I spent many
long days in learning here names and dates of which we afterwards
made a learned display.  Le Carpentier taught me many things, and,
among others, he described various signs by which to recognize old
coins when the die is worn off.  Thus, a Trajan, a Tiberius, or a
Marcus Aurelius became as familiar to me as a five-franc piece.

Owing to my old trade, I could open a watch with ease, and do it
with one hand, so as to be able to read the maker's name without
the public suspecting it: then I shut up the watch again and the
trick was ready; my son managed the rest of the business.

But that power of memory which my son possessed in an eminent
degree certainly did us the greatest service.  When we went to
private houses, he needed only a very rapid inspection in order to
know all the objects in a room, as well as the various ornaments
worn by the spectators, such as chatelaines, pins, eyeglasses,
fans, brooches, rings, bouquets, etc.  He thus could describe these
objects with the greatest ease, when I pointed them out to him by
our secret communication.  Here is an instance:

One evening, at a house in the Chaussee d'Antin, and at the end of
a performance which had been as successful as it was loudly
applauded, I remembered that, while passing through the next room
to the one we were now in, I had begged my son to cast a glance at
a library and remember the titles of some of the books, as well as
the order they were arranged in.  No one had noticed this rapid
examination.

"To end the second-sight experiment, sir," I said to the master of
the house, "I will prove to you that my son can read through a
wall.  Will you lend me a book?"

I was naturally conducted to the library in question, which I
pretended now to see for the first time, and I laid my finger on a
book.

"Emile," I said to my son, "what is the name of this work?"

"It is Buffon," he replied quickly.

"And the one by its side?" an incredulous spectator hastened to
ask.

"On the right or left?" my son asked.

"On the right," the speaker said, having a good reason for choosing
this book, for the lettering was very small.

"The Travels of Anacharsis the Younger," the boy replied.  "But,"
he added, "had you asked the name of the book on the left, sir, I
should have said Lamartine's Poetry.  A little to the right of this
row, I see Crebillon's works; below, two volumes of Fleury's
Memoirs"; and my son thus named a dozen books before he stopped.

The spectators had not said a word during this description, as they
felt so amazed; but when the experiment had ended, all complimented
us by clapping their hands.


III

THE MAGICIAN WHO BECAME AN AMBASSADOR


[It is not generally known that Robert-Houdin once rendered his
country an important service as special envoy to Algeria.  Half a
century ago this colony was an endless source of trouble to France.
Although the rebel Arab chieftain Abd-del-Kader had surrendered in
1847, an irregular warfare was kept up against the French authority
by the native Kabyles, stimulated by their Mohammedan priests, and
particularly through so-called "miracles," such as recovery from
wounds and burns self-inflicted by the Marabouts and other fanatic
devotees of the Prophet.

Thus in 1856 the hopes of the French Foreign Office rested on
Robert-Houdin.  He was requested to exhibit his tricks in the most
impressive form possible, with the idea of proving to the deluded
Arabs that they had been in error in ascribing supernatural powers
to their holy men.]


It was settled that I should reach Algiers by the next 27th of
September, the day on which the great fetes annually offered by the
capital of Algeria to the Arabs would commence.

I must say that I was much influenced in my determination by the
knowledge that my mission to Algeria had a quasi-political
character.  I, a simple conjurer, was proud of being able to render
my country a service.

It is known that the majority of revolts which have to be
suppressed in Algeria are excited by intriguers, who say they are
inspired by the Prophet, and are regarded by the Arabs as envoys of
God on earth to deliver them from the oppression of the Roumi
(Christians).

These false prophets and holy Marabouts, who are no more sorcerers
than I am, and indeed even less so, still contrive to influence the
fanaticism of their coreligionists by tricks as primitive as are
the spectators before whom they are performed.

The government was, therefore, anxious to destroy their pernicious
influence, and reckoned on me to do so.  They hoped, with reason,
by the aid of my experiments, to prove to the Arabs that the tricks
of their Marabouts were mere child's play, and owing to their
simplicity could not be done by an envoy from Heaven, which also
led us very naturally to show them that we are their superiors in
everything, and, as for sorcerers, there are none like the French.

Presently I will show the success obtained by these skillful
tactics.

Three months were to elapse between the day of my acceptance and
that of my departure which I employed in arranging a complete
arsenal of my best tricks, and left St. Gervais on the 10th of
September.

I will give no account of my passage, further than to say no sooner
was I at sea than I wished I had arrived, and, after thirty-six
hours' navigation, I greeted the capital of our colony with
indescribable delight.

On the 28th of October, the day appointed for my first performance
before the Arabs, I reached my post at an early hour, and could
enjoy the sight of their entrance into the theater.

Each goum,[1] drawn up in companies, was introduced separately, and
led in perfect order to the places chosen for it in advance.  Then
came the turn of the chiefs, who seated themselves with all the
gravity becoming their character.


[1] Brigade of native soldiers under French command.  It was this
influential native faction that the Foreign Office wished
particularly to impress, through Robert-Houdin's skill.--EDITOR.


Their introduction lasted some time, for these sons of nature could
not understand that they were boxed up thus, side by side, to enjoy
a spectacle, and our comfortable seats, far from seeming so to
them, bothered them strangely.  I saw them fidgeting about for some
time, and trying to tuck their legs under them, after the fashion
of European tailors.

The caids, agas, bash-agas, and other titled Arabs, held the places
of honor, for they occupied the orchestra stalls and the dress
circle.

In the midst of them were several privileged officers, and, lastly,
the interpreters were mingled among the spectators, to translate my
remarks to them.

I was also told that several curious people, having been unable to
procure tickets, had assumed the Arab burnous, and, binding the
camel's-hair cord round their foreheads, had slipped in among their
new coreligionists.

This strange medley of spectators was indeed a most curious sight.
The dress circle, more especially, presented an appearance as grand
as it was imposing.  Some sixty Arab chiefs, clothed in their red
mantles (the symbol of their submission to France), on which one or
more decorations glistened, gravely awaited my performance with
majestic dignity.

I have performed before many brilliant assemblies, but never before
one which struck me so much as this.  However, the impression I
felt on the rise of the curtain, far from paralyzing me, on the
contrary inspired me with a lively sympathy for the spectators,
whose faces seemed so well prepared to accept the marvels promised
them.  As soon as I walked on the stage, I felt quite at my ease,
and enjoyed, in anticipation, the sight I was going to amuse myself
with.

I felt, I confess, rather inclined to laugh at myself and my
audience, for I stepped forth, wand in hand, with all the gravity
of a real Sorcerer.  Still, I did not give way, for I was here not
merely to amuse a curious and kind public, I must produce a
startling effect upon coarse minds and prejudices, for I was
enacting the part of a French Marabout.

Compared with the simple tricks of their pretended sorcerers, my
experiments must appear perfect miracles to the Arabs.

I commenced my performance in the most profound, I might almost say
religious, silence, and the attention of the spectators was so
great that they seemed petrified.  Their fingers alone moving
nervously, played with the beads of their rosaries, while they
were, doubtless, invoking the protection of the Most High.

This apathetic condition did not suit me, for I had not come to
Algeria to visit a waxwork exhibition.  I wanted movement,
animation, life in fact, around me.

I changed my batteries, and, instead of generalizing my remarks, I
addressed them more especially to some of the Arabs, whom I
stimulated by my words, and still more by my actions.  The
astonishment then gave way to a more expressive feeling, which was
soon evinced by noisy outbursts.

This was especially the case when I produced cannon balls from a
hat, for my spectators, laying aside their gravity, expressed their
delighted admiration by the strangest and most energetic gestures.

Then came--greeted by the same success--the bouquet of flowers,
produced instantaneously from a hat; the CORNUCOPIA, supplying a
multitude of objects which I distributed, though unable to satisfy
the repeated demands made on all sides, and still more by those who
had their hands full already; the FIVE-FRANC PIECES, sent across
the theater with a crystal box suspended above the spectators.

One trick I should much have liked to perform was the INEXHAUSTIBLE
BOTTLE, so appreciated by the Parisians and the Manchester "hands";
but I could not employ it in this performance, for it is well known
the followers of Mohammed drink no fermented liquor--at least not
publicly.  Hence, I substituted the following with considerable
advantage:

I took a silver cup, like those called "punch bowls" in the
Parisian cafes.  I unscrewed the foot, and passing my wand through
it showed that the vessel contained nothing; then, having refitted
the two parts, I went to the center of the pit, when, at my
command, the bowl was MAGICALLY filled with sweetmeats, which were
found excellent.

The sweetmeats exhausted, I turned the bowl over, and proposed to
fill it with excellent coffee; so, gravely passing my hand thrice
over the bowl, a dense vapor immediately issued from it, and
announced the presence of the precious liquid.  The bowl was full
of boiling coffee, which I poured into cups, and offered to my
astounded spectators.

The first cups were only accepted, so to speak, under protest; for
not an Arab would consent to moisten his lips with a beverage which
he thought came straight from Shaitan's kitchen; but, insensibly
seduced by the perfume of their favorite liquor, and urged by the
interpreters, some of the boldest decided on tasting the magic
liquor, and all soon followed their example.

The vessel, rapidly emptied, was repeatedly filled again with equal
rapidity; and it satisfied all demands, like my inexhaustible
bottle, and was borne back to the stage still full.

But it was not enough to amuse my spectators; I must also, in order
to fulfill the object of my mission, startle and even terrify them
by the display of a supernatural power.

My arrangements had all been made for this purpose, and I had
reserved for the end of my performances three tricks, which must
complete my reputation as a sorcerer.

Many of my readers will remember having seen at my performances a
small but solidly built box, which, being handed to the spectators,
becomes heavy or light at my order; a child might raise it with
ease, and yet the most powerful man could not move it from its
place.

I advanced, with my box in my hand, to the center of the
"practicable," communicating from the stage to the pit; then,
addressing the Arabs, I said to them:

"From what you have witnessed, you will attribute a supernatural
power to me, and you are right.  I will give you a new proof of my
marvelous authority, by showing that I can deprive the most
powerful man of his strength and restore it at my will.  Anyone who
thinks himself strong enough to try the experiment may draw near
me."  (I spoke slowly, in order to give the interpreter time to
translate my words.)

An Arab of middle height, but well built and muscular, like many of
the Arabs are, came to my side with sufficient assurance.

"Are you very strong?" I said to him, measuring him from head to
foot.

"Oh, yes!" he replied carelessly.

"Are you sure you will always remain so?"

"Quite sure."

"You are mistaken, for in an instant I will rob you of your
strength, and you shall become as a little child."

The Arab smiled disdainfully as a sign of his incredulity.

"Stay," I continued; "lift up this box."

The Arab stooped, lifted up the box, and said to me, coldly, "Is
that all?"

"Wait--!" I replied.

Then, with all possible gravity, I made an imposing gesture, and
solemnly pronounced the words:

"Behold! you are weaker than a woman; now, try to lift the box."

The Hercules, quite cool as to my conjuration, seized the box once
again by the handle, and gave it a violent tug, but this time the
box resisted, and, spite of his most vigorous attacks, would not
budge an inch.

The Arab vainly expended on this unlucky box a strength which would
have raised an enormous weight, until, at length, exhausted,
panting, and red with anger, he stopped, became thoughtful, and
began to comprehend the influences of magic.

He was on the point of withdrawing; but that would be allowing his
weakness, and that he, hitherto respected for his vigor, had become
as a little child.  This thought rendered him almost mad.

Deriving fresh strength from the encouragements his friends offered
him by word and deed, he turned a glance round them, which seemed
to say: "You will see what a son of the desert can do."

He bent once again over the box: his nervous hands twined round the
handle, and his legs, placed on either side like two bronze
columns, served as a support for the final effort.

But, wonder of wonders! this Hercules, a moment since so strong and
proud, now bows his head; his arms, riveted to the box, undergo a
violent muscular contraction; his legs give way, and he falls on
his knees with a yell of agony!

An electric shock, produced by an inductive apparatus, had been
passed, on a signal from me, from the further end of the stage into
the handle of the box.  Hence the contortions of the poor Arab!

It would have been cruelty to prolong this scene.

I gave a second signal, and the electric current was immediately
intercepted.  My athlete, disengaged from his terrible bondage,
raised his hands over his head.

"Allah! Allah!" he exclaimed, full of terror; then wrapping himself
up quickly in the folds of his burnous, as if to hide his disgrace,
he rushed through the ranks of the spectators and gained the front
entrance.

With the exception of my stage boxes and the privileged spectators
who appeared to take great pleasure in this experiment, my audience
had become grave and silent, and I heard the words "Shaitan!"
"Djenoum!" passing in murmur round the circle of credulous men,
who, while gazing on me, seemed astonished that I possessed none of
the physical qualities attributed to the angel of darkness.

I allowed my public a few moments to recover from the emotion
produced by my experiment and the flight of the herculean Arab.

One of the means employed by the Marabouts to gain influence in the
eyes of the Arabs is by causing a belief in their invulnerability.

One of them, for instance, ordered a gun to be loaded and fired at
him from a short distance, but in vain did the flint produce a
shower of sparks; the Marabout pronounced some cabalistic words,
and the gun did not explode.

The mystery was simple enough; the gun did not go off because the
Marabout had skillfully stopped up the vent.

Colonel de Neven explained to me the importance of discrediting
such a miracle by opposing to it a sleight-of-hand trick far
superior to it, and I had the very article.

I informed the Arabs that I possessed a talisman rendering me
invulnerable, and I defied the best marksman in Algeria to hit me.

I had hardly uttered the words when an Arab, who had attracted my
notice by the attention he had paid to my tricks, jumped over four
rows of seats, and disdaining the use of the "practicable," crossed
the orchestra, upsetting flutes, clarionets, and violins, escaladed
the stage, while burning himself at the footlights, and then said,
in excellent French:

"I will kill you!"

An immense burst of laughter greeted both the Arab's picturesque
ascent and his murderous intentions, while an interpreter who stood
near me told me I had to deal with a Marabout.

"You wish to kill me!" I replied, imitating his accent and the
inflection of his voice.  "Well, I reply, that though you are a
sorcerer, I am still a greater one, and you will not kill me."

I held a cavalry pistol in my hand, which I presented to him.

"Here, take this weapon, and assure yourself it has undergone no
preparation."

The Arab breathed several times down the barrel, then through the
nipple, to assure himself there was a communication between them,
and after carefully examining the pistol, said:

"The weapon is good, and I will kill you."

"As you are determined, and for more certainty, put in a double
charge of powder, and a wad on the top."

"It is done."

"Now, here is a leaden ball; mark it with your knife, so as to be
able to recognize it, and put it in the pistol, with a second wad."

"It is done."

"Now that you are quite sure your pistol is loaded, and that it
will explode, tell me, do you feel no remorse, no scruple about
killing me thus, although I authorize you to do so?"

"No, for I wish to kill you," the Arab repeated coldly.

Without replying, I put an apple on the point of a knife, and,
standing a few yards from the Marabout, ordered him to fire.

"Aim straight at the heart," I said to him.

My opponent aimed immediately, without the slightest hesitation.

The pistol exploded, and the bullet lodged in the center of the
apple.

I carried the talisman to the Marabout, who recognized the ball he
had marked.

I could not say that this trick produced greater stupefaction than
the ones preceding it: at any rate, my spectators, palsied by
surprise and terror, looked round in silence, seeming to think,
"Where the deuce have we got to here!"

A pleasant scene, however, soon unwrinkled many of their faces.
The Marabout, though stupefied by his defeat, had not lost his
wits; so, profiting by the moment when he returned me the pistol,
he seized the apple, thrust it into his waist belt, and could not
be induced to return it, persuaded as he was that he possessed in
it an incomparable talisman.

For the last trick in my performance I required the assistance of
an Arab.

At the request of several interpreters, a young Moor, about twenty
years of age, tall, well built, and richly dressed, consented to
come on the stage.  Bolder and more civilized, doubtless, than his
comrades of the plains, he walked firmly up to me.

I drew him toward the table that was in the center of the stage,
and pointed out to him and to the other spectators that it was
slightly built and perfectly isolated.  After which, without
further preface, I told him to mount upon it, and covered him with
an enormous cloth cone, open at the top.

Then, drawing the cone and its contents on to a plank, the ends of
which were held by my servant and myself, we walked to the
footlights with our heavy burden, and upset it.  The Moor had
disappeared--the cone was perfectly empty!

Immediately there began a spectacle which I shall never forget.

The Arabs were so affected by this last trick, that, impelled by an
irresistible feeling of terror, they rose in all parts of the
house, and yielded to the influence of a general panic.  To tell
the truth, the crowd of fugitives was densest at the door of the
dress circle, and it could be seen, from the agility and confusion
of these high dignitaries, that they were the first to wish to
leave the house.

Vainly did one of them, the Caid of the Beni-Salah, more courageous
than his colleagues, try to restrain them by his words:

"Stay! stay! we cannot thus lose one of our coreligionists.  Surely
we must know what has become of him, or what has been done to him.
Stay! stay!"

But the coreligionists only ran away the faster, and soon the
courageous caid, led away by their example, followed them.

They little knew what awaited them at the door of the theater; but
they had scarce gone down the steps when they found themselves face
to face with the "resuscitated Moor."

The first movement of terror overcome, they surrounded the man,
felt and cross-questioned him; but, annoyed by these repeated
questions, he had no better recourse than to escape at full speed.

The next evening the second performance took place, and produced
nearly the same effect as the previous one.


The blow was struck: henceforth the interpreters and all those who
had dealings with the Arabs received orders to make them understand
that my pretended miracles were only the result of skill, inspired
and guided by an art called prestidigitation, in no way connected
with sorcery.

The Arabs doubtless yielded to these arguments, for henceforth I
was on the most friendly terms with them.  Each time a chief saw
me, he never failed to come up and press my hand.  And, even more,
these men whom I had so terrified, when they became my friends,
gave me a precious testimony of their esteem--I may say, too, of
their admiration, for that is their own expression.


IV

FACING THE ARAB'S PISTOL


[The severest trial of all was unexpectedly encountered during a
visit paid by the conjurer and his wife to Bou-Allem-ben-Sherifa,
Bash-Aga of the Djendel, a tribe of the desert interior.]


We entered a small room very elegantly decorated, in which were two
divans.

"This," our host said, "is the room reserved for guests of
distinction; you can go to bed when you like, but if you are not
tired, I would ask your leave to present to you several chief men
of my tribe, who, having heard of you, wish to see you."

"Let them come in," I said, after consulting Madame Houdin, "we
will receive them with pleasure."

The interpreter went out, and soon brought in a dozen old men,
among whom were a Marabout and several talebs, whom the bash-aga
appeared to hold in great deference.

They sat down in a circle on carpets and kept up a very lively
conversation about my performances at Algiers.  This learned
society discussed the probability of the marvels related by the
chief of the tribe, who took great pleasure in depicting his
impressions and those of his coreligionists at the sight of the
MIRACLES I had performed.

Each lent an attentive ear to these stories, and regarded me with a
species of veneration; the Marabout alone displayed a degree of
skepticism, and asserted that the spectators had been duped by what
he called a vision.

Jealous of my reputation as a French sorcerer, I thought I must
perform before the unbeliever a few tricks as a specimen of my late
performance.  I had the pleasure of astounding my audience, but the
Marabout continued to offer me a systematic opposition, by which
his neighbors were visibly annoyed; the poor fellow did not
suspect, though, what I had in store for him.

My antagonist wore in his sash a watch, the chain of which hung
outside.

I believe I have already mentioned a certain talent I possess of
filching a watch, a pin, a pocketbook, etc., with a skill by which
several of my friends have been victimized.

I was fortunately born with an honest and upright heart, or this
peculiar talent might have led me too far.  When I felt inclined
for a joke of this nature, I turned it to profit in a conjuring
trick, or waited till my friend took leave of me, and then recalled
him: "Stay," I would say, handing him the stolen article, "let this
serve as a lesson to put you on your guard against persons less
honest than myself."

But to return to our Marabout.  I had stolen his watch as I passed
near him and slipped into its place a five-franc piece.

To prevent his detecting it, and while waiting till I could profit
by my larceny, I improvised a trick.  After juggling away Bou-
Allem's rosary, I made it pass into one of the numerous slippers
left at the door by the guests; this shoe was next found to be full
of coins, and to end this little scene comically, I made five-franc
pieces come out of the noses of the spectators.  They took such
pleasure in this trick that I fancied I should never terminate it.
"Douros! douros!"[1] they shouted, as they twitched their noses.  I
willingly acceded to their request, and the douros issued at
command.


[1] Gold Arabic coin.


The delight was so great that several Arabs rolled on the ground;
this coarsely expressed joy on the part of Mohammedans was worth
frenzied applause to me.

I pretended to keep aloof from the Marabout, who, as I expected,
remained serious and impassive.

When calm was restored, my rival began speaking hurriedly to his
neighbors, as if striving to dispel their illusion, and, not
succeeding, he addressed me through the interpreter:

"You will not deceive me in that way," he said, with a crafty look.

"Why so?"

"Because I don't believe in your power."

"Ah, indeed!  Well, then, if you do not believe in my power, I will
compel you to believe in my skill."

"Neither in one nor the other."

I was at this moment the whole length of the room from the
Marabout.

"Stay," I said to him; "you see this five-franc piece."

"Yes."

"Close your hand firmly, for the piece will go into it in spite of
yourself."

"I am ready," the Arab said, in an incredulous voice, as he held
out his tightly closed fist.

I took the piece at the end of my fingers, so that the assembly
might all see it, then, feigning to throw it at the Marabout, it
disappeared at the word "Pass!"

My man opened his hand, and, finding nothing in it, shrugged his
shoulders, as if to say, "You see, I told you so."

I was well aware the piece was not there, but it was important to
draw the Marabout's attention momentarily from the sash, and for
this purpose I employed the feint.

"That does not surprise me," I replied, "for I threw the piece with
such strength that it went right through your hand, and has fallen
into your sash.  Being afraid I might break your watch by the blow,
I called it to me: here it is!"  And I showed him the watch in my
hand.

The Marabout quickly put his hand in his waist belt, to assure
himself of the truth, and was quite stupefied at finding the five-
franc piece.

The spectators were astounded.  Some among them began telling their
beads with a vivacity evidencing a certain agitation of mind; but
the Marabout frowned without saying a word, and I saw he was
spelling over some evil design.

"I now believe in your supernatural power," he said; "you are a
real sorcerer; hence, I hope you will not fear to repeat here a
trick you performed in your theater"; and offering me two pistols
he held concealed beneath his burnous, he added, "Come, choose one
of these pistols; we will load it, and I will fire at you.  You
have nothing to fear, as you can ward off all blows."

I confess I was for a moment staggered; I sought a subterfuge and
found none.  All eyes were fixed upon me, and a reply was anxiously
awaited.

The Marabout was triumphant.

Bou-Allem, being aware that my tricks were only the result of
skill, was angry that his guest should be so pestered; hence he
began reproaching the Marabout.  I stopped him, however, for an
idea had occurred to me which would save me from my dilemma, at
least temporarily; then, addressing my adversary:

"You are aware," I said, with assurance, "that I require a talisman
in order to be invulnerable, and, unfortunately, I have left mine
at Algiers."

The Marabout began laughing with an incredulous air.  "Still," I
continued, "I can, by remaining six hours at prayers, do without
the talisman, and defy your weapon.  To-morrow morning, at eight
o'clock, I will allow you to fire at me in the presence of these
Arabs, who were witnesses of your challenge."

Bou-Allem, astonished at such a promise, asked me once again if
this offer were serious, and if he should invite the company for
the appointed hour.  On my affirmative, they agreed to meet before
the stone bench in the market place.

I did not spend my night at prayers, as may be supposed, but I
employed about two hours in insuring my invulnerability; then,
satisfied with the result, I slept soundly, for I was terribly
tired.

By eight the next morning we had breakfasted, our horses were
saddled, and our escort was awaiting the signal for our departure,
which would take place after the famous experiment.

None of the guests were absent, and, indeed, a great number of
Arabs came in to swell the crowd.

The pistols were handed me; I called attention to the fact that the
vents were clear, and the Marabout put in a fair charge of powder
and drove the wad home.  Among the bullets produced, I chose one
which I openly put in the pistol, and which was then also covered
with paper.

The Arab watched all these movements, for his honor was at stake.

We went through the same process with the second pistol and the
solemn moment arrived.

Solemn, indeed, it seemed to everybody--to the spectators who were
uncertain of the issue, to Madame Houdin, who had in vain besought
me to give up this trick, for she feared the result--and solemn
also to me, for as my new trick did not depend on any of the
arrangements made at Algiers, I feared an error, an act of
treachery--I knew not what.

Still I posted myself at fifteen paces from the sheik, without
evincing the slightest emotion.

The Marabout immediately seized one of the pistols, and, on my
giving the signal, took a deliberate aim at me.  The pistol went
off, and the ball appeared between my teeth.

More angry than ever, my rival tried to seize the other pistol, but
I succeeded in reaching it before him.

"You could not injure me," I said to him, "but you shall now see
that my aim is more dangerous than yours.  Look at that wall."

I pulled the trigger, and on the newly whitewashed wall appeared a
large patch of blood, exactly at the spot where I had aimed.

The Marabout went up to it, dipped his finger in the blood, and,
raising it to his mouth, convinced himself of the reality.  When he
acquired this certainty, his arms fell, and his head was bowed on
his chest, as if he were annihilated.

It was evident that for the moment he doubted everything, even the
Prophet.

The spectators raised their eyes to heaven, muttered prayers, and
regarded me with a species of terror.

This scene was a triumphant termination to my performance.  I
therefore retired, leaving the audience under the impression I had
produced.  We took leave of Bou-Allem and his son, and set off at a
gallop.


The trick I have just described, though so curious, is easily
prepared.  I will give a description of it, while explaining the
trouble it took me.

As soon as I was alone in my room, I took out of my pistol case--
without which I never travel--a bullet mold.

I took a card, bent up the four edges, and thus made a sort of
trough, in which I placed a piece of wax taken from one of the
candles.  When it was melted, I mixed with it a little lampblack I
had obtained by putting the blade of a knife over the candle, and
then ran this composition in the bullet mold.

Had I allowed the liquid to get quite cold, the ball would have
been full and solid; but in about ten seconds I turned the mold
over, and the portions of the wax not yet set ran out, leaving a
hollow ball in the mold.  This operation is the same as that used
in making tapers, the thickness of the outside depending on the
time the liquid has been left in the mold.

I wanted a second ball, which I made rather more solid than the
other; and this I filled with blood, and covered the orifice with a
lump of wax.  An Irishman had once taught me the way to draw blood
from the thumb without feeling any pain, and I employed it on this
occasion to fill my bullet.

Bullets thus prepared bear an extraordinary resemblance to lead,
and are easily mistaken for that metal when seen at a short
distance off.

With this explanation, the trick will be easily understood.  After
showing the leaden bullet to the spectators, I changed it for my
hollow ball, and openly put the latter into the pistol.  By
pressing the wad tightly down, the wax broke into small pieces, and
could not touch me at the distance I stood.

At the moment the pistol was fired, I opened my mouth to display
the lead bullet I held between my teeth, while the other pistol
contained the bullet filled with blood, which bursting against the
wall, left its imprint, though the wax had flown to atoms.


It is no wonder that after such exhibitions Robert-Houdin's success
was complete.  The Arabs lost all confidence in Marabout
"miracles," and thus a dangerous smoldering flame of disaffection
to the French was entirely smothered.--EDITOR.